
<h2 class="sectionedit1"><a name="bitlash_online" id="bitlash_online">Bitlash Online</a></h2>
<div class="level2">

<p>
Welcome to Bitlash Online.
</p>

<p>
Bitlash is an open source interpreted language shell and embedded programming environment.  This website documents Bitlash for the popular and useful <a href="http://arduino.cc" class="urlextern" title="http://arduino.cc"  rel="nofollow">Arduino</a>.
</p>

<p>
The Bitlash shell runs entirely on the Arduino and supports many of the familiar Arduino functions.  Bitlash interprets commands you type on the serial port:

</p>
<pre class="code">bitlash here! v1.1 (c) 2010 Bill Roy -type HELP- 1383 bytes free
&gt; print &quot;Hello, world!&quot;, millis()
Hello, world! 11939
&gt; </pre>

<p>

It&#039;s easy to extend Bitlash by naming a sequence of commands as a <a href="/wiki/macros:overview" class="wikilink1" title="macros:overview">Macro</a>, which is like a new word in the Bitlash language.  A Bitlash application is a set of such macros, and since they are stored in the EEPROM, Bitlash can start up your application automatically at boot time for standalone operation.
</p>

<p>
In cases where you need native C code to get closer to the hardware, perhaps for speed or to interface with a custom peripheral,
it&#039;s also easy to integrate your C code with Bitlash as a <a href="/wiki/userfunctions" class="wikilink1" title="userfunctions">User Function</a>.
</p>

<p>
Read on for more about Bitlash.
</p>

</div>
<!-- EDIT1 SECTION "Bitlash Online" [1-1111] -->
<h3 class="sectionedit2"><a name="quick_start" id="quick_start">Quick Start</a></h3>
<div class="level3">
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <a href="/wiki/download" class="wikilink1" title="download">Download</a> the latest release of Bitlash for the Arduino</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <a href="/wiki/install" class="wikilink1" title="install">Install</a> Bitlash and upload it to your Arduino</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Proceed to the <a href="/wiki/docindex" class="wikilink1" title="docindex">Documentation Index</a></div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Read more <a href="/wiki/about" class="wikilink1" title="about">About Bitlash</a> and the <a href="/wiki/author" class="wikilink1" title="author">Author</a></div>
</li>
</ul>

<p>
—-
</p>

</div>
<!-- EDIT2 SECTION "Quick Start" [1112-1365] -->
<h3 class="sectionedit3"><a name="what_is_bitlash" id="what_is_bitlash">What is Bitlash?</a></h3>
<div class="level3">

<p>

Bitlash is an embedded interpreter that runs in about 14k of memory on an Atmel AVR processor.  It works nicely with Arduino to make a development and prototyping tool for those situations where you need to bang some bits on the Arduino but writing a sketch in C is premature.  It&#039;s very convenient for bringing up and debugging new hardware.
</p>

<p>
The Bitlash command language is very similar to Arduino C and includes a large repertiore of the familiar Arduino C functions so you can hack your hardware from the serial command line or even over the internet via telnet.
</p>

<p>
You can store commands as <a href="/wiki/macros:overview" class="wikilink1" title="macros:overview">macros</a> in EEPROM and autostart them at bootup, making the automation and maintenance of small applications very easy.  Here is the classic Blink13 program as a complete Bitlash application in two macros, <strong>toggle13</strong> to toggle the led and <strong>startup</strong> to initialize and run it:

</p>
<pre class="code">&gt; toggle13:=&quot;d13=!d13&quot;
&gt; startup:=&quot;pinmode(13,1);run toggle13,1000&quot;
&gt; boot
(d13 flashes)</pre>
<hr />

</div>
<!-- EDIT3 SECTION "What is Bitlash?" [1366-2394] -->
<h3 class="sectionedit4"><a name="release_announcements" id="release_announcements">Release Announcements</a></h3>
<div class="level3">

</div>

<h4><a name="bitlash_11_release_announcement" id="bitlash_11_release_announcement">Bitlash 1.1 Release Announcement</a></h4>
<div class="level4">

<p>

Bitlash 1.1 is available at the <a href="/wiki/download" class="wikilink1" title="download">download</a> page.  Here is a summary of the changes:

</p>
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <strong>User Functions:</strong> This release is mainly about the new <a href="/wiki/userfunctions" class="wikilink1" title="userfunctions">userfunctions</a> feature, which makes it Really Easy to add your C function to Bitlash.  You&#039;ll find some new examples of this feature in the Arduino IDE at the File → Examples → bitlash menu item, and documentation at the <a href="/wiki/userfunctions" class="wikilink1" title="userfunctions">userfunctions</a> page.</div>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <strong>New Functions inb() and outb(): </strong> Read and write the AVR registers from your Bitlash scripts.  Details on the <a href="/wiki/functions" class="wikilink1" title="functions">functions</a> page.</div>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <strong>Deprecated Functions:</strong> These functions didn&#039;t make the cut at spring cleaning time and are no longer supported in the Bitlash core: du(), map(), shiftout(), sa(), sr() and usr().</div>
</li>
</ul>

</div>

<h4><a name="bitlash_10_available_now" id="bitlash_10_available_now">Bitlash 1.0 Available Now</a></h4>
<div class="level4">

<p>

After over a year in development Bitlash 1.0 is available for <a href="/wiki/download" class="wikilink1" title="download">download</a>. 
</p>

<p>
There is one bug fix since the RC2 version, renaming the folders and files in the /examples tree to remove the &#039;-&#039; which became deprecated in Arduino 0017.
</p>

<p>
Bitlash 1.0 is tested on <a href="http://arduino.cc/en/Main/Software" class="urlextern" title="http://arduino.cc/en/Main/Software"  rel="nofollow">Arduino 0017</a> and <a href="http://code.google.com/p/arduino/downloads/list" class="urlextern" title="http://code.google.com/p/arduino/downloads/list"  rel="nofollow">Arduino 0018 RC1</a>.  The <a href="/wiki/install" class="wikilink1" title="install">install</a> instructions are updated for 0017.  
</p>

</div>

<h5><a name="documentation_overhaul" id="documentation_overhaul">Documentation Overhaul</a></h5>
<div class="level5">

<p>

The Bitlash documentation is now hosted in this wiki.  Please send comments to the <a href="/wiki/author" class="wikilink1" title="author">Author</a>
</p>
<hr />

</div>
<!-- EDIT4 SECTION "Release Announcements" [2395-] -->